First of all, I was just interested in how you got started in science fiction.
What drew you to the field and when you started reading it and personal things like that?
Right. Well, I actually began a serious interest in science fiction after my first degree in English
at the University of Singapore as it was then called.
I have of course been reading science fiction for a much longer period.
As you yourself know, I mean most of us get to science fiction when we are about 12 or 13
and through the comics and then we graduate through the books.
And by the time we are 18, we usually tuck it away, unfortunately for a while.
That's what happened with me.
And when I had my first degree and I was going on to do my Master's,
I had thought of doing research into Indian writing and English.
But my professor, who was quite keen on getting new work done,
advised me to study the impact of technology on the literary imagination.
And that's exactly what I did.
And that's when I developed a very serious interest, began meeting authors, attending meetings, writing to people.
Okay, and your present involvement in the field besides teaching, besides teaching,
and of course you've written a book or two and so forth, you said you've traveled around
and so forth, could you describe briefly what that entails?
Right, yes. Certainly as an academic as I think is the best way of describing myself at the present moment.
I get lots of opportunities to travel all over the world at conferences and meetings.
And as often as I can within the broad interpretation of any one conference that might be taking place,
I try to offer papers on science fiction because I do feel it's a very viable topic for discussion.
And what I think needs to be done is to expose as many people as it's possible to science fiction
so that they can understand and get to know what science fiction is all about.
And that's what I do.
Apart from teaching science fiction in the National University of Singapore now,
I also edit critical essays on science fiction from all over the world and we've just brought out a book called The Stellar Gauge,
which has in-depth academic analyses of about 12 authors, including some very famous ones.
And our contributors are also famous like Christopher Priest, Brian Aldenst, John Slating,
George Turner and the others.
I also have just edited the first ever collection of science fiction short stories from Singapore.
These were the best stories submitted for a first ever national wide science fiction short story competition.
So that's what I do briefly.
I'm also at the moment, if I may say, just adding something personally,
working on a science fiction novel that would incorporate all my travelings all over the world,
my readings up to now, some speculations that I have about the future,
discussions and meetings with various science fiction authors like Arthur Clarke, Brian Aldenst, Jack Wilmsen and others.
You will have Singapore as its direct setting, but the whole world as a background.
I look forward to that.
Sure need encouragement.
Your book, Wonder and Awe, The World of Science Fiction,
briefly, what was the theme or the purpose or the central idea of that publication?
Right. That is actually a prelude to a much bigger book that I'm working on called Science Fiction and the Literary Imagination.
In Wonder and Awe, what I basically try to do is to expose a lot of the fallacies, I think,
that are associated with science fiction and with science fiction criticism,
particularly on the part of mainstream literary critics.
And I argue, I think, quite vehemently, case for the validity and legitimization of science fiction as literature today.
That's a basic theme of that. It's a very small book.
You feel in that the distinction between science fiction and mainstream is an artificial or a useless one,
that they should be one, considered one, the same thing?
I think ultimately the distinctions ought to disappear, frankly,
because the more we try to erect these boundaries, the more we get into trouble to water us,
because as we all know, categories are, by their very nature, exclusive.
And when they become too exclusive, as I think the case has been with science fiction for a long time,
what develops is the hightest, and that could lead to a breakdown in communication rather than an integration.
And I think one of the reasons why perhaps science fiction has not quite enjoyed the kind of status that it ought to,
as a valid and viable form of literature in our time, is the fact that too often, and by too many people,
it has been very zealously and jealously guarded as something exclusive,
something that one entered with a great deal of trepidation, things like that.
So yes, I think ultimately there has to be an elimination of the categories.
As Brian already says, science fiction is literature.
Could you give some examples of the influences that have kept them separate?
You mean things like fans, the publishing industry, or what kind of...
Yes, I think fans to a large extent explain the exclusiveness.
As we are witnessing in this will convention here in Denver itself,
one of the things that I notice most readily is the fact that a lot of the fans are not really,
I think, very keen on a serious discussion of science fiction.
They're here to have a good time, and that's a very good thing in itself.
I mean, I think people ought to have a good time.
But at the same time, they mustn't then go on and complain that,
oh, you know, we are regarded as freaks, as people on our own individual trips,
because I think in some ways we SF enthusiasts invite that kind of charge or accusation.
I also feel that a lot of the science fiction writers are themselves responsible for this.
I've talked personally with a number of them, and I've heard many of them speaking,
and I've read what they have said in fanzines and things.
They do want to keep this kind of thing going,
because the science fiction writers feel that they are commercially viable only in so far as they have got a large fan following.
And if they have a large fan following, then they feel that they can sell.
Now, the same writers also lament the fact that serious critics at the universities, in colleges and all,
are not taking them seriously.
But I want to question that, because to a large extent I think it's part of their own making.
And they don't put enough effort and serious struggle into the work,
and therefore the outcome of it is quite mediocre, to say the least.
It seemed to me to be a very rare author in today's world though,
who would dedicate his life to writing significant works when he could make some money.
Yes, yes.
Nevertheless, I do think that the world of science fiction, I think,
reveals an astounding number of very young people who have made it good overnight.
People who are much below 40 have already got established reputations in the world of SF.
I'm not to be accused of being extra conservative or something,
but I do feel that it needs a lot of time and serious effort if you want to establish yourself as an author for posterity.
You have your fans, you have your books, and you have your novels, and your publishers, and your money.
But I think all this would disappear the moment you die,
or the moment what you write about becomes outdated.
One of the reasons why SF writers are so eager to get book of the book coming out,
is that the book of the book goes out of date so fast.
And this is, I think, what they really mean when people talk about the pulp world of SF.
You've spoken of the need for a strong literary voice,
or responsible critical impetus or influence to make science fiction respectable and so forth.
Could you explain that briefly?
Yes, if I could draw an analogy.
I think those of us who have been engaged in the study of English literature
know how difficult it has been for any other literature written in English to make any kind of headway,
given the big, rich heritage of English literature itself coming down from Chaucer, downwinds.
In my university in Singapore for a long time, even American literature was taboo,
because the professor there didn't believe that much American literature, and I mean the classics,
really offered anything significant to those who were interested in doing literature as a subject.
Now that's a kind of resistance that I think good critics, and with the reference to American literature,
I think the good critics that really put American literature on the world map,
and made all of us aware of the potential of American literature were people like Edmund Wilson,
people like Lionel Trilling.
I think what they did for American literature is what is necessary at the current time for science fiction.
And as I cast my eyes around the world, I don't think there are people with that kind of calibre
who are seriously engaged in science fiction criticism,
because I do think you need a good, viable, critical tradition to give strength and body
to the, or at least do the selecting, which is very essential to the body of science fiction itself.
And of course that leads to another question. I've heard your ideas on this before.
What is it that prevents responsible critics from approaching science fiction?
Oh, I think primarily, as I'm going to repeat myself, it's, you know, but primarily there are two reasons.
One is this whole thing about science fiction being an exclusive thing, and as I said at the talk today,
science fiction fandom and authors and publishers and all tend to regard themselves as a little colony.
And much as they don't try to colonize others, they also resent any kind of intrusion from the outside world.
Now that of course puts a serious literary critic on his guard and on his defensive, you know,
creates a kind of defensive posture, because the moment he wants to make an incursion into the world of science fiction,
he's dismissed as being yet another academic who's trying to bullshit his way through.
And that's one opposition that's from within SF, and I think the second is from within themselves.
I mean, most literary critics that I know of, and this is again why I stress the fact that there aren't people of the caliber of people at Lionel Trilling,
most literary critics I know of are pretty narrow-minded and very set in their views,
and it's very difficult to convince them that there is very viable stuff in SF.
And as a result of which they are ignorant, they do not know what's happening in the real world of science fiction.
And because of this great sort of idea, great image that is created of SF as being something for young people,
something that is only exciting to the scientists or those who are scientifically inclined,
a lot of literary critics just keep themselves away.
I think they look themselves out from this very exciting world of SF.
You think then that SF significant literary works can be written in the SF mode?
Oh, certainly. More certainly. I mean, after all, what is literature but an exquisite fusion of thoughts with emotion?
What we have mostly in SF is a thought without, I think, the accompanying emotion.
But these also mean that a lot of the language that is faulty in SF,
I think that's the main reason why literary critics do not want to talk too much about SF or take it too seriously.
The main fault, as I see it, is that a lot of the language in SF novels or SF short stories does not measure up to any kind of enrichment.
It doesn't enrich the imagination at all.
There are lots of ideas and ideas upon ideas, but in order to be considered literature, you need something beyond that.
And this is where SF has a very viable role to play.
If we can get an author who is able to use language with the amount of versatility and talent and skill that a lot of the so-called mainstream writers can do,
then I think there's a lot of scope because then you really would have the backup of your ideas as well as your imaginative expression of this.
What I'm saying in a roundabout way is that too much of SF tends to be superficial and too simplistic.
There's not enough metaphor. There isn't enough metaphorical language.
A symbol is not a symbol in a SF book. It is exactly what it's meant to be.
Therefore, SF, if we may use it in a linguistic jargon here, a lot of SF is merely denotational and not connotational.
It doesn't connot anything, it just denotes.
Is that what you meant before when you said that SF doesn't transcend?
Yes. This is why so much of SF becomes obsolete.
There's too much attention, too much ostentatious attention paid to scientific detail, scientific accuracy, new technological breakthroughs and things.
So that the imagination is sapped up by the facts rather than fiction.
So that what happens in SF is that science takes over the fiction.
And to be established as literature, I think it's the fiction that needs to prevail.
You said a moment ago, and most anybody would agree with this, I think that SF is based on ideas or plot and so forth.
And it's therefore weak on character and things like that.
Do you think that if a serious mainstream writer or say a serious writer attempted to infuse mainstream values into a literature of ideas,
would that destroy SF as we know it? Would that take away its charm, its vitality, and we would have something new that wouldn't be SF?
I think those of us who feel that that is the only distinction that differentiates or the only characteristic that differentiates SF for mainstream,
I think for those of us who believe in that, yes, we will be disappointed.
But I think that would be a very narrow view of SF itself, though.
Put it this way.
Are we to assume that all the things that say somebody like Kurt Vonnegut has written, or somebody like Ursula Le Guin has written,
or somebody like Walter Miller has written, are we to assume that these three authors, for example, are no longer writing science fiction
because they're trying to infuse their work with the qualities of mainstream fiction?
I think the immediate answer would be no.
And yet, from a different perspective, I feel that, yes, the superficial attraction of SF for a lot of people would be gone.
I mean, if you're only interested in reading a book as to know what happens next, what happens next, I mean, that's the only reason.
Then I think your appetite would be very soon vetted.
Do you think that the so-called New Wave movement in SF a few years back, do you think that did anything to bring SF closer to mainstream?
Because they were, as I read, the much more interested in character and symbol and so forth.
Was that a benefit? Did you see that as something beneficial in the field?
Yes and no. I think whenever something gets caught on in a kind of bandwagon, the detectants or the people who just jump onto the bandwagon
in order to make a name for themselves, these are, I think, the real detractors.
Though they may not appear to be detractors, I consider them detractors because they're just opportunistic.
I mean, they can do a lot of damage, though I think that people like Michael Mocog and Brian Aldis have done some very good work
in terms of trying to make science fiction into literature and trying to create a very viable literature.
I might add at this point that, something that I've spoken to you before about, that as science and technology moves into the soft areas,
into the areas of behavioural sciences, like biology or physiology or brain research and things like that,
I think that's when the good literature from science fiction would emerge because then the SF writers would be forced to consider
the interior landscape of a human being and not merely the exterior.
I think too much attention at the moment is being paid on the external environment without giving enough focus to the internal.
And as science and technology moves, I mean science and technology has more or less made man the master of this environment,
but now technology is all trying to make man the master of himself as technology and science itself moves with all its machinery and apparatus
into the human mind and drives the probe into areas unknown before.
Likewise, the science fiction writers would also follow and I think that's when a new spur might come.
Just to follow this, probably my last question in this area.
Do you feel there is a need for an escapist literature that is there purely for escape and with no significance beyond that?
Does it have any value or is there a need for that?
Yes, I think we all need escapes and reading a good book is escape enough.
Now, put a question another way.
If I were to read, say, The Tempest by Shakespeare or The Miller's Tale by Chaucer, which you are yourself an expert,
I mean, would that not be a tent of a kind of escape given the 20th century?
I think it's not so much the need for escape that I'm questioning, but the quality of that escape.
I think some escapes are better than others as some escapades are more exciting than others.
And that's what I'm really questioning.
I think there is fantasy and there's horror movies and horror things and whatnot,
but I think ultimately science fiction, I mean, in the 20th century from one point of view,
everything that we do is escapist because, you know, how are we to confront reality anyway?
Too much reality does us no good, as Eliot pointed out long time ago.
So I think there is a genuine need for the escape, but if science fiction could provide a more qualitative escape
for minds to engage themselves, you know, and come back again and again to a point of reference,
then I think we would see science fiction as really drawing and developing into maturity.
In your travels and your lectures and so forth, the places you go to, could you comment on the differences
or the similarities, I'm not sure what there would be between, say, the fandom,
the environment surrounding science fiction in other countries versus America?
Is there a big difference there?
Not very much from what I'm seeing.
Fans all over the world, and this is the unique thing I think about science fiction,
fans all over the world are absolute devotees of the field.
I mean, there's no question about that.
Fans everywhere in Singapore, in Malaya, in India, in Australia, New Zealand, England, America,
they all show the same kind of fervor, vitality, gusto in their approach to science fiction.
What I have noticed is that in America, among the academics, there seems to be now at least somewhat less
of a resistance to the teaching of science fiction in the university to having science fiction causes on their curriculum.
In England, I think the breakthrough is gradually being made.
We've got some fine people in England working seriously in the science fiction area.
In Australia, I think generally there's still a good deal of conservatism.
New Zealand is almost absolutely conservative.
In Singapore itself, while I do what I can for science fiction, there's a whole unit on that, at the university.
So, I don't think there's any difference between fans all over the world,
but the differences come at the level of the serious reader, science fiction.
I don't mean to imply that fans are not serious readers,
but I don't think they read science fiction the way in which an academic would want to read it
or the way in which a literary critic would want to do it.
I have to confess a great deal of ignorance about oriental science fiction, period.
In fact, I would even have to ask, is there a body of oriental science fiction,
and is it different than what American readers would know in science fiction?
Yeah, I think there's going to be some very good things coming out from China
when more and more of the stuff that Chinese are writing becomes available in English.
Since I myself don't read Chinese, I rely on the translations and what my Chinese friends tell me.
I think there we're going to see a kind of science fiction that is free
of the obvious influence either of British or American SF.
Now, at the moment, the one country in Asia that has a lot of science fiction is Japan,
and because of the close links between Japan and America, that also shows in its literature,
Japanese SF is not quite different from American SF.
Though I think the science fiction that's being written in Singapore, say,
or the science fiction in India, and this might be also a reflection of our links with Britain,
we reveal more of British influence.
And in some ways, I don't want to, how should I say it?
I would immediately, I think, beg indulgence and forgiveness if I step on many toes here.
I do think that a lot of American SF tends unfortunately to be a little more gimmicky
than, say, the British science fiction.
I do feel that the British SF writers do take themselves a little more seriously as art,
as writers of literature than the American SF writers.
And this is not to cast aspersion because they are, of course, exceptions.
And some of the best science fiction, both criticism and fiction, has been actually written in America.
But I do think that on the whole, America tends to be a little more taken up with immediate returns
and immediate returns, the more sensational you are, the more gimmicky you are,
the more immediately you make an impact.
But as I say, the more quickly you receive your recognition, the more quickly you also tend to lose it.
Singapore science fiction, was that the title of the...
Yes, of the anthology, yes.
Okay, now, would those writers in that anthology be all from Singapore?
I mean, was that put together or is that online?
Yes, it was confined only to Singaporeans.
Could you expose it to contests, put the book together?
Yes.
Could you explain that?
Yes, Singapore science fiction is a collection of 14 short stories that I've edited.
These were the best, the prize-winning short stories in the national competition we had on short stories,
science fiction short story competition in 1918.
And I had invited Brian Aldis over to Singapore to read some of the scripts and give us his comments.
He thought it was very good.
In fact, he's got a forward to the anthology, in which he says we're the fiction of Southeast Asia and Singapore.
It's going to blaze an over-like onto the universe, you know, in that very exuberant terminology of his.
They're mainly written by young people, and that's exciting.
Though I must say that the first and second prize went to people who are really in their 40s,
and I think there are at least five stories in Singapore science fiction,
which could measure up to good science fiction short stories anywhere in the world today.
The other eight tend to be a little derivative and imitative.
And there, all kinds of influences are revealed, mainly in British, but also very pronounced American influence.
But then that's again another problem with science fiction all over the world.
I mean, there's a lot of imitation and derivation, isn't there?
I'm kind of curious to know who you would consider as being in your terms a good science fiction writer.
You mentioned Miller and Ursula Lagoine already.
Could you name some others?
Say contemporary writers who you would respect.
Contemporary.
Yeah.
I think Elizabeth Lynn might make it if she continues to persevere in the craft.
I'm a little sorry as to what's happening to Ray Bradbury,
because I haven't seen anything from him for a while.
As I look around, I don't think I see much beyond that.
I think the field is still dominated by people like Hal Clemence and Michael Mocock and others across the Atlantic.
But I don't see, frankly speaking, any young writer on the horizon who could make a breakthrough.
Or if there is, I'm ignorant unfortunately.
I'm going to ask this from my own knowledge.
I'm not going to put this on the air.
But have you read any of Joe Haldeman?
No.
The forever war I was going to ask about.
It seemed to me that would almost meet your requirements of a mainstream science fiction.
Okay.
Guys, let's see if I've gotten any more here.
I've gotten a lot of good material so far.
I think Angela Carter, by the way, does something quite good among the women writers.
Angela Carter.
I don't know her at all.
Fireworks.
Anthology called fireworks.
The distinctions may not always be very clear because she is more in the realm of fantasy than science fiction.
Oh yes, of course, there is a contemporary science fiction writer that I do want to put a plug for.
That's Philip K. Dick.
I think Philip K. Dick is producing work which not only challenges all the assumptions of science fiction, as we know it hitherto,
but he's also writing work that would make the categories between mainstream and science fiction disappear.
Because I think he really is right into the fusion of the two.
And of course, all this in England I think is doing some very good work.
And I would also mention Stanislaw Lem, who was from Europe.
And somebody like Christopher Priest.
Though I wish Priest spent just a little more time getting his thoughts more coagently organised.
We're just about out of tape. Let me ask a couple of questions. This is It Runs Down.
Okay, now you've mentioned, you said you are working on a novel.
Yes.
And your book Wonder and Awe was simply a prelude to a longer work.
What else do you envision? I mean, what kinds of writing or work? Do you see yourself doing?
On a personal level?
Oh yes, on a personal level.
Well, quite frankly, Darrell, I'm very eclectic in my taste.
I've also published quite extensively in Commonwealth literature, what they call New Literatures in English.
And I've looked, I've done a book on Patrick White, the Australian Nobel Prize winning novelist.
I'm increasingly, I'm working on a book on a Malaysian writer, Yi Pyong Hong.
And I also, devil in poetry, so my second volume of verse is coming out shortly.
I'm doing a critical study of all South Asian literature in English.
And as far as science fiction goes, I'm going, I'm working on a big study of the work of Arthur C. Clarke.
That would be a, what a critical study of his work?
Yes, a critical analysis of Clarke's work.
You admire his work?
To a good extent, yes.
Not the novels with which he's usually associated.
I think that Clarke has produced some very good work.
What I question sometimes is his faith in science and technology to cure the ills of mankind.
But I do think that in his earlier work, and in some of the later ones, like Rondeau Gourmet Rama,
I think he does try to attempt some kind of stylistic elegance.
You know, I mean, Arthur Clarke is now very rich and he can write a novel, take his time, relax.
And I think this is very important. I want to say this earlier, but, you know,
I think a lot of science fiction writers, the reason why they don't seem to produce work that's sustained
is the fact that they write from a very anxious angle.
They're very anxious whether the fans are going to receive it well, they're anxious whether they're going to get published,
how the editors are going to respond and things like that.
And I think too much anxiety doesn't do good because the spontaneity is lost,
the natural flow of the language is lost.
And when a man is uptight, I don't think we're looking at him at his best.
Let me just ask a pursuitist for a second here. You said that this book, Wonder and Awe, would be leading to a larger work.
Would that be an expansion of your ideas regarding criticism and the need for it and the approach it...
Yes, because Wonder and Awe, I've been very interested in all the reviews that Wonder and Awe has got,
and I've gained more insight into my own critical thinking around the subject.
When I was working on Wonder and Awe, I corresponded with people like David Kettler and Northrop Fry,
who I think have offered something quite seminal in literary criticism of science fiction and Robert Conquest.
I think these are the pioneers of genuine literary criticism as far as science fiction goes.
And what I want to do now is put all these thoughts together and apply a lot of the critical things that I've fed them over the publication of Wonder
and the reviews subsequently.
I want to put all these together and apply them to specific authors in science fiction.
And I think it might take about three or four years for it to come out, but I'm very interested in that.
It also, by the way, would be an expansion of my own master's thesis, which was entitled Technology and the Modern Novel.
And the kind of questions that I'm interested in asking myself now, a good writer would naturally take into account man's environment,
and if man's environment is changing, he has to reckon with that.
Now, science fiction does that exemplarily.
How does, for example, the novels of A.C. Clarke that incorporate all the new adventures of space travel or cloning and things,
how do they differ in their literary impact from, say, the novels of D.H. Lawrence,
who was also saying that a mechanical civilization is screwing the world up?
That's the kind of comparisons that I want to do and work into.
That's great. Okay, I think... Yeah, I better turn that off.
We're just about out.
Thanks a lot. Thank you very much for the opportunity.
I've been stuck for hours. That's fascinating.